.TH DRAWBOY 1
.SH NAME
drawboy \- CompuDobby III loom driver
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBdrawboy\fP [\fIOptions\fP] <\fIdraft\~file\~path\fP>

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B drawboy
is a tool for driving an AVL CompuDobby III loom from a terminal interface. The
picks in the specified draft file are sent to the loom over a serial interface
as the user treadles the draft. In addition to responding to treadle events
from the loom, \fBdrawboy\fP is interactive and responds to a number of commands:
reversing weaving direction, tabby mode vs. lift\-plan mode, changing the current
pick, and changing the set of picks to be woven. The up and down arrow keys can
also be used to quickly change to adjacent picks.
.PP
The draft file can either be in the standard WIF format or in the Fiberworks
DTX format.
.PP
The terminal should support xterm/ANSI style control sequences and Unicode,
which pretty much all do these days. If the terminal does not display the
Unicode characters used by \fBdrawboy\fP then the
.B \-\-ascii
option will force \fBdrawboy\fP to restrict itself to ASCII characters. If ANSI styling
(bold, color, etc.) does not display properly then the
.B \-\-ansi=no
option will force plain\-text output. Some terminals support 24\-bit color, which
\fBdrawboy\fP can take advantage of (macOS Terminal does not). Use the
.B \-\-ansi=truecolor
option to enable 24\-bit TrueColor output.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Outputs a help message and exits.
.TP
.B \-\-findloom
Engages the loom finder wizard to help the user determine which device file is
the USB serial port interface. Fixed (non\-USB) serial ports cannot be found
using the loom finder wizard, consult your system documentation. The wizard can
output the possible device paths for fixed serial ports.
.TP
\fB\-p\fP\fIpick\fP, \fB\-\-pick\fP=\fIpick\fP
Sets the initial pick from the pick list to start weaving. The default pick is
the first pick in the pick list. If the specified pick is larger than size of
the pick list then a modulo calculation is performed to determine where to
start weaving in the pick list.
.TP
\fB\-P\fP\fIpicklist\fP, \fB\-\-picks\fP=\fIpicklist\fP
Sets the list of picks from the draft file to weave. This is a comma\-separated
list of pick ranges with an optional multiplier in front. The optional multiplier
is a number followed by the letter \fIx\fP. The pick range can a single number,
a pair of numbers separated by a hyphen, or an arbitrary list of tabby picks
(ab).

.IP
Pick ranges can also insert a tabby pick with each pattern pick from the draft file.
A single pick preceeded by a tilde (~) will insert the appropriate tabby pick
along with the specified draft pick. A range of picks separated by a tilde instead
of a hyphen will insert a tabby pick with each draft pick.

.IP
The default pick list is the entire draft file.

.TP
\fB\-\-tabby\fP=\fItabby\~spec\fP
Sets the tabby for the current weaving. The \fItabby\~spec\fP is a string of the
letters A and B. It indicates which shafts are in tabby A and which are in tabby
B. For example, \fB\-\-tabby=AABBBBBB\fP indicates that shafts 1 and 2 are tabby
A and shafts 3 through 8 are tabby B. The default is odd shafts on tabby A and
even shafts on tabby B.
.TP
\fB\-\-tabbycolor\fP=\fItabby\~color\fP
Specifies what color to display for tabby picks. The \fItabby\~color\fP is a three
or six digit hexadecimal number that indicates an RGB color triple, RRGGBB
for six digits and RGB for three digits. The default tabby color is 00FF00, or
green.
.TP
\fB\-\-tabbyPattern\fP=\fItabby\~pattern\fP
Specifies whether inserted tabby picks are before or after the pattern pick and
whether to start with tabby A or tabby B. Permitted pattern values are xAyB, AxBy,
xByA, and BxAy. Default tabby pattern is xAyB.
.TP
\fB\-\-loomDevice\fP=\fIloom\~path\fP
The path to the serial port in the /dev directory. The loom path is required for
\fBdrawboy\fP to operate. It can also be specified with the \fBDRAWBOY_LOOMDEVICE\fP
environment variable.
.TP
\fB\-\-shafts\fP=\fIshaft\~count\fP
Number of shafts supported by the loom. The shaft count is required for
\fBdrawboy\fP to operate. It can also be specified with the \fBDRAWBOY_SHAFTS\fP
environment variable. Allowed values are 8, 12, 16, 24, 32, and 40.
.TP
\fB\-\-dobbyType\fP=\fIdobby\~type\fP
Whether the loom is a positive dobby (+ or positive), or a negative dobby (\- or
negative). The dobby type is required for \fBdrawboy\fP to operate. It can also be
specified with the \fBDRAWBOY_DOBBY\fP environment variable. Most AVL looms
are positive dobbies, but the Workshop Dobby Loom (WDL) is a negative dobby.
.TP
.B \-\-ascii
Indicates that the terminal does not support Unicode characters and that only
ASCII characters can be used. It can also be specified with the
\fBDRAWBOY_ASCII\fP environment variable.
.TP
\fB\-\-ansi\fP=\fIANSI\~support\fP
Indicates whether the terminal supports ANSI display modes (e.g., bold or color).
Accepted values are \fByes\fP for normal ANSI support, \fBno\fP for no ANSI
support, and \fBtruecolor\fP for ANSI support with 24\-bit color. It can also be
specified with the \fBDRAWBOY_ANSI\fP environment variable.

.SH OPERATION
When \fBdrawboy\fP is started it does not know the state of the loom, whether the
shed is open or closed, whether or not it is OK to send shaft commands to the
loom. It will display the first pick in your pick list with the \fBPENDING\fP
flag at the end of the pick. Treadle to open and close the shed. This will
sync \fBdrawboy\fP with the loom, it will send the liftplan for the first pick to
the loom and you can now start weaving.
.PP
From this point on, when you close the shed \fBdrawboy\fP will send the liftplan for
the next pick to the loom and it will display the next pick. The pick line
will begin with a color\-coded draw\-down for the pick, followed by the pick
number and lift\-plan for the pick. These last two will be color\-coded with
the weft color for the pick.
.PP
Under the pick line will be the input prompt for the current pick. It will
display the current weaving mode (lift\-plan or tabby) and the current line
in the draft file. Treadling the loom will advance to the next pick. At any time,
the user can type commands to change the behavior of \fBdrawboy\fP:

.TP
l \- \fBLift\-plan Mode\fP
\fBdrawboy\fP weaves picks from the pick list.
.TP
t \- \fBTabby Mode\fP
\fBdrawboy\fP weaves alternating picks of tabby A and tabby B.
.TP
r \- \fBReverse Weaving\fP
Changes the weaving direction from the pick list. This has no effect in tabby
mode. But in lift\-plan mode it determines whether to move forward or backward
through the pick list.
.TP
s \- \fBSelect Pick\fP
Select the next pick in the pick list. The up and down arrows act as shortcuts
for selecting the previous or next pick in the pick list.
.TP
p \- \fBChange Pick List\fP
Overrides the pick list. The pick list specification is the same format as with
the command line option. Changing the pick list resets the pick to 1.
.TP
q \- \fBQuit\fP
Quits \fBdrawboy\fP.

.SH EXAMPLES

.SS Setting the pick list:
Here is an example of the various elements in a pick list.
.PP
.RS
.EX
drawboy --picks=1-8,7-1,10,5x20-29,7x40 towels.wif
.EE
.RE
.PP
This sets the pick list:
.RS
.EX
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
.P
7 6 5 4 3 2 1
.PP
10
.PP
20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
.PP
40 40 40 40 40 40 40
.EE
.RE
.PP
Here a compact draft for a braided twill has various subparts multiplied to
produce 2.25" headers and an overall length of 32" at 24ppi, with waste yarn
picks to indicate the cut line between towels.
.PP
.RS
.EX
drawboy --picks=7x1-8,24x9-36,93-100,7x101-108,AB "gudruns towel4.wif"
.EE
.RE
.PP
The braided twill towel starting with 56 picks (7x1-8) of basket weave
header. Then the 28 pick repeating part of the pattern is repeated 24 times to
get 672 picks of the main body of the towel (24x9-36). Then we have 8 picks
(93-100) pattern trail-out. 56 more picks of basket weave for the footer.
Lastly, two picks of tabby with waste yarn to show the cut line between towels.
.SS Continuing between weaving sessions:

.PP
\fBdrawboy\fP does not remember where you are weaving between sessions. Instead, the
history buffer of the terminal is used to remember the weaving state.
.PP
.EX
% drawboy --picks=7x1-8,24x9-36,93-100,7x101-108,AB "gudruns towel4.wif"
--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--    1 -->  | ** * * |
--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--    2 -->  | ** * * |
||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||    3 -->  |*  * * *|
||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||    4 -->  |*  * * *|
--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--    5 -->  | ** * * |
--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--    6 -->  | ** * * |
||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||    7 -->  |*  * * *|
||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||    8 -->  |*  * * *|
--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--    9 -->  | ** * * |
--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--   10 -->  | ** * * |
||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||   11 -->  |*  * * *|
||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||   12 -->  |*  * * *|
--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--   13 -->  | ** * * |
--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--   14 -->  | ** * * |
||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||   15 -->  |*  * * *|
||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||   16 -->  |*  * * *|
--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--   17 -->  | ** * * |
.EE
.PP
 time passes
.PP
.EX
||-||--|||--||--||--||-||--|||--||--||--||-|||--||--||--||  303 -->  |* *  * *|
|---||--|--||--||--||---||--|--||--||--||---||--||--||--||  304 -->  |*  ** * |
--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--  305 -->  | ** * * |
-||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||---||--||--||--  306 -->  | * * * *|
||--||--||--|--||---||--||--||--|--||---||--||--||--||--||  307 -->  |*  * ** |
|--||--||--|||--||-||--||--||--|||--||-||--|||--||--||--||  308 -->  |* * *  *|
--||--||--|--||--||---||--||--|--||--||---||--||--||--||--  309 -->  | ** ** *|
-||--||--|||--||--||-||--||--|||--||--||-||---||--||--||--  310 -->  | * *  * |
||--||--||-||--||--|||--||--||-||--||--|||--||--||--||--||  311 -->  |*  *  * |
|--||--||---||--||--|--||--||---||--||--|--|||--||--||--||  312 -->  |* * ** *|
--||--||--|--||--||---||--||--|--||--||---||--||--||--||--  313 -->  | ** ** *|
-||--||--|||--||--||-||--||--|||--||--||-||---||--||--||--  314 -->  | * *  * |
||--||--||-||--||--|||--||--||-||--||--|||--||--||--||--||  315 -->  |*  *  * |
|--||--||---||--||--|--||--||---||--||--|--|||--||--||--||  316 -->  |* * ** *|
--||--||--||-||--|||--||--||--||-||--|||--||--||--||--||--  317 -->  | ** *  *|
-||--||--||---||--|--||--||--||---||--|--||---||--||--||--  318 -->  | * * ** |
||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||  319 -->  |*  * * *|
|--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--|||--||--||--||  320 -->  |* * * * |
--|--||---||--||--||--|--||---||--||--||--|---||--||--||--  321 -->  | * ** * |
-|||--||-||--||--||--|||--||-||--||--||--|||--||--||--||--  322 -->  | **  * *|
[Weaving:22] T)abby  L)iftplan  R)everse  S)elect pick  P)ick list  Q)uit
%
.EE
.PP
It's time to turn the loom off for the night, so you quit \fBdrawboy\fP. The next day
you continue weaving. The draw\-down from the previous days weaving is still
visible in your terminal window and the last pick was 322.
.PP
.EX
% drawboy --picks=7x1-8,24x9-36,93-100,7x101-108,AB "gudruns towel4.wif --pick=322
-|||--||-||--||--||--|||--||-||--||--||--|||--||--||--||--  322 -->  | **  * *|
|--||--||---||--||--|--||--||---||--||--|--|||--||--||--||  323 -->  |* * ** *|
||--||--||-||--||--|||--||--||-||--||--|||--||--||--||--||  324 -->  |*  *  * |
-||--||--|||--||--||-||--||--|||--||--||-||---||--||--||--  325 -->  | * *  * |
--||--||--|--||--||---||--||--|--||--||---||--||--||--||--  326 -->  | ** ** *|
|--||--||---||--||--|--||--||---||--||--|--|||--||--||--||  327 -->  |* * ** *|
||--||--||-||--||--|||--||--||-||--||--|||--||--||--||--||  328 -->  |*  *  * |
-||--||--|||--||--||-||--||--|||--||--||-||---||--||--||--  329 -->  | * *  * |
--||--||--|--||--||---||--||--|--||--||---||--||--||--||--  330 -->  | ** ** *|
||-||--|||--||--||--||-||--|||--||--||--||-|||--||--||--||  331 -->  |* *  * *|
|---||--|--||--||--||---||--|--||--||--||---||--||--||--||  332 -->  |*  ** * |
--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--  333 -->  | ** * * |
-||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||--||---||--||--||--  334 -->  | * * * *|
||--||--||--|--||---||--||--||--|--||---||--||--||--||--||  335 -->  |*  * ** |
|--||--||--|||--||-||--||--||--|||--||-||--|||--||--||--||  336 -->  |* * *  *|
--||--||--|--||--||---||--||--|--||--||---||--||--||--||--  337 -->  | ** ** *|
[Weaving:9] T)abby  L)iftplan  R)everse  S)elect pick  P)ick list  Q)uit 
.EE

.SH ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables affect the behavior of \fBdrawboy\fP. They
provide information that will likely be common to all \fBdrawboy\fP runs. It may
be useful to set them in the users account profile.
.TP
.B DRAWBOY_LOOMDEVICE
Indicates the path to the serial device for talking to the loom.
.TP
.B DRAWBOY_SHAFTS
Indicates how many shafts the loom supports. Accepted values are 8, 12, 16, 24,
32, or 40.
.TP
.B DRAWBOY_DOBBY
Indicates whether the loom has a positive dobby (positive or +) or a negative
dobby (negative or \-).
.TP
.B DRAWBOY_ASCII
If it exists then \fBdrawboy\fP will only output ASCII characters.
.TP
.B DRAWBOY_ANSI
Indicates the ANSI support level for the terminal. Accepted values are \fByes\fP
for normal ANSI support, \fBno\fP for no ANSI support, and \fBtruecolor\fP for
ANSI support with 24\-bit color.

